this story starts with these two my kids
we were hiking in the open woods when my
daughter noticed a plastic tub with cat
litter and creak she looked at me and
said daddy that doesn't go there and
when she said that it reminded me of
summer camp on the morning of visiting
day right before they let our anxious
parents come barreling through the gates
our camp director would say quickly
everyone will pick up five pieces of
litter you get a couple hundred kids
each picking up five pieces and pretty
soon you've got a much cleaner camp so I
thought why not apply that crowd-sourced
cleanup model to the entire planet and
that was the inspiration for literati
the vision is to create a litter free
world let me show you how it started I
took a picture of a cigarette using
Instagram then it took another photo and
another photo and another photo and I
noticed two things one litter became
artistic and approachable and two at the
end of a few days I had 50 photos on my
stone and I had picked up each piece and
I realized that I was keeping a record
of the positive impact I was having on
the planet that's 50 less things that
you might fear you might step on or some
bird might eat so I started telling
people what I was doing and they started
participating and one day this photo
showed up from China and that's when I
realized that literati was more than
just pretty pictures we were becoming a
community that was collecting data each
flow to tell the story so the two picked
up what a geotag tells us where and a
timestamp tells us when so I built a
Google map and started plotting a point
where pieces were being picked up and
through that process the community grew
and the data grew
my two kids go to school right in that
bullseye litter it's blending into the
background of our lives but what if we
brought it to the forefront what if we
understood exactly what was on our
streets our sidewalks and our school
yards how might we use that data to make
a difference well let me show you the
first is with cities San Francisco
wanted to understand what percentage of
litter was cigarettes why to create a
tax so they put a couple of people in
the streets with pencils and clipboards
who walked around collecting information
which led to a 20 cent tax on all
cigarette sales and then they got sued
by Big Tobacco who claimed the
collecting information with pencils and
clipboards is not a precise nor provable
the city called me and asked if our
technology could help not sure they
realized that our technology was my
Instagram account but I said yes we can
and we can tell you if that's a
parliament or a pall mall plus every
photograph is geo tagged and time
stamped providing you with proof for
days and 5000 pieces later our data was
used in court to not only defend but
double the tax generating an annual
recurring revenue of 4 million dollars
for San Francisco to clean itself up now
during that process I learned two things
one Instagram is not the right tool so
we built an app and two if you think
about it every city in the world has
unique litter fingerprint and that
fingerprint provides both the source of
the problem and the path to the solution
if you could generate a revenue stream
just by understanding the percentage of
cigarettes well what about coffee cups
or soda cans or plastic bottle and if
you could fingerprint San Francisco well
how about Oakland or Amsterdam or
somewhere much closer to home and what
about brands how might they use this
data to align their environmental and
Tomic interests there's a block in
downtown Oakland that's covered in
blight the literati community got
together and picked up 1500 pieces and
here's what we learned most of that
litter came from a very well-known taco
brand most of that brands litter with
their own hot sauce packets and most of
those hot sauce packets hadn't even been
opened the problem and the path to the
solution well maybe that brand only
gives out hot sauce upon request or
installs both dispensers or comes up
with more sustainable packaging how does
the brand take an environmental hazard
turn it into an economic engine and
become an industry hero but you really
want to create change there's no better
place to start and without kids a group
of fifth graders takes of twelve hundred
and forty seven cases of litter just on
their schoolyard and they learn that the
most common type of litter with a
plastic straw wrappers from their own
cafeteria so these kids went to the
principal and asked why are we still
buying straws and they stop and they
learn that individually they can each
make a difference but together they
created an impact it doesn't matter if
you're a student or scientist whether
you live in Honolulu or Hanoi this is a
community for everyone started because
of too little kids in the Northern
California woods and today it's spread
across the world and you know how we're
getting there one piece at a time thank
you
[Applause]